.TH BGLMAKE 1 "Aug 15 1998" 
.de BP
.sp
.ti -.2i
..
.SH NAME
bglmake \- create or update Bigloo makefiles

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bglmake
[ options ]
[ sourcefile ]

.SH DESCRIPTION

.B bglmake
reads \fIsourcefile\fR, computes the transitive closure of the import 
relationship and generates a \fImakefile\fR file that can be used by
the \fBglmake(1)\fR program to compile the application or the library.
If no \fIsourcefile\fR is provided, then bglmake display the template file
for generating Makefile.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP 16
.TP
\fB-v\fR
Verbose mode

.TP
\fB-q\fR
Prevent loading the \fI~/.bglmakerc\fR user configuration file.

.TP
\fB-suffix <suf>\fR
Adds \fIsuf\fR to the \fBbglmake\fR source file suffixes list. Default 
suffixes are "scm", "sch" and "bgl".

.TP
\fBfile\fR
is the name of the "main" file for an application of the name of the "heap"
file for a library.

.TP
\fB-I<path>\fR
Add \fIpath\fR to the directory list read for searching Bigloo source files.

.TP
\fB-X<path>\fR
Exclude \fIpath\fR from the directory list read for searching Bigloo 
source files.

.TP
\fB-o <makefile>\fR
The name of the \fImakefile\fR file to be updated

.TP
\fB-p <name>\fR
The \fIname\fR of the project. This name is used in backup and versionning 
entries.

.TP
\fB-t <name>\fR
The \fIname\fR of the target binary file or the name of the library. 

.TP
\fB-f<template>\fR
Set an alternative template file.

.TP
\fB-object <obj>\fR
Update the makefile for adding \fIobj\fR to the object list.

.TP
\fB-source <src>\fR
Update the makefile for adding \fIsrc\fR to the source file list.

.TP
\fB-main <file>\fR
Set the initial main file and tells \fbbglmake\fR that the project is
an "application" (by opposition to libraries). This \fIFile\fR is the 
starting point of the transitive closure of the imported modules.

.TP
\fB-heap <file>\fR
Set the initial heap file and tells \fbbglmake\fR that the project is
an "library" (by opposition to applications). This \fIFile\fR is the 
starting point of the transitive closure of the imported modules.

.SH TEMPLATES
When \fbbglmake\fR generates a \fImakefile\fR, it uses templates. Theses
templates may be specified with some option or they be printed out. For that
it is enough to call \fbbglmake\fR without any parameter. Template files uses
some extra "macro". They are:

.TP 5
.IP $[PROJECT]
this macro is replaced with the project name (option -p). If no \fI-p\fR option
is used the default project name is the name of the current directory that
contains the \fIsourcefile\fR.

.IP $[TARGET_NAME]
this macro is replaced with the target name (option -t). If no \fI-t\fR option
is used the default target name is the name of the current directory that
contains the \fIsourcefile\fR.

.IP $[MAKEFILE]
this macro is replaced with the \fImakefile\fR name (-o option).

.SH "EXAMPLE"

A Makefile is created by ``bglmake foo.scm -o Makefile''. Then it may be
updated with ``make updatemakefile''.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
bigloo(1), bglafile(1), bgldepend(1), bgltags(1), make(1), bglmco(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Manuel SERRANO,
Manuel.Serrano@inria.fr


