.TH BGLTAGS 1 "Aug 15 1998" 
.de BP
.sp
.ti -.2i
..
.SH NAME
bgltags \- generate tag file for Emacs

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bgltags
[ options ]
[ \fIobjfile\fR [ \fIgmon.out\fR ] ] 

.SH DESCRIPTION

The \fBbgltags\fR program is used to create a tag table file, in a
format understood by \fBemacs(1)\fR. This programs understand the
syntax of the Bigloo files. It reads the files specified on the
command line, and write a tag table (defaults: \fITAGS\fR) in the
current working directory. Files specified with relative file names
will be recorded in the tag table with file names relative to the
directory where the tag table re- sides.  Files specified with
absolute file names will be recorded with absolute file names. The
program does not recognize the language used in an input file based on
its file name and contents.  The \fI--language\fR switch can be used
to force parsing of the file names following the switch according to
the given language, overriding guesses based on file-name
extensions. Source files that are not Scheme are actually processed by
the \fBetags\fR program.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP 5
.TP
\fB-a, --append\fR
Append to existing tag file. 

.TP
\fB-o tagfile, --output=tagfile\fR
Explicit name of file for tag table; overrides  default  `TAGS'.

.TP
\fB-v\fR
Print the current version of the program.

.TP
\fB-module\fR
Generate an entry in the table for each modules. Normally modules identifier
are not indexed in the tags table.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
bigloo(1), bglafile(1), bgldepend(1), etags(1), emacs(1), bglmco(1), xemacs(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Manuel SERRANO,
Manuel.Serrano@inria.fr


