@c =================================================================== @c
@c    serrano/prgm/project/bigloo/manuals/search.texi                  @c
@c    ------------------------------------------------------------     @c
@c    Author      :  Manuel Serrano                                    @c
@c    Creation    :  Tue Apr 11 07:43:31 2006                          @c
@c    Last change :                                                    @c
@c    Copyright   :  2006 Manuel Serrano                               @c
@c    ------------------------------------------------------------     @c
@c    Fast search algorithms                                           @c
@c =================================================================== @c

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------- @c
@c    Fast search                                                      @c
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------- @c
@node Fast search, Structures and Records, Pattern Matching, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Fast search
@cindex fast string search

This chapters details the Bigloo's API for fast string search algorithms.

@menu
* Knuth - Morris - Pratt::
@end menu


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------- @c
@c    Class declaration                                                @c
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------- @c
@node Knuth - Morris - Pratt, , , Fast search
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up@section Class declaration
@section Knuth, Morris, and Pratt
@cindex Knuth, Morris, and Pratt

Bigloo supports an implementation of the @emph{Knuth, Morris, and Pratt}
algorithm on strings and memory mapped area, @xref{Memory mapped area}.

@deffn {bigloo procedure} kmp-table pattern
This function creates a @emph{kmp}-table used for fast search.
@end deffn

@deffn {bigloo procedure} kmp-mmap kmp-table mmap offset
@deffnx {bigloo procedure} kmp-string kmp-table string offset
This function searches the @var{pattern} described by @var{kmp-table}
in the memory mapped area @var{mmap} (respec. in the @var{string}). 
The search starts at @var{offset}. If an occurrence
is found, its position in the @var{mmap} is returned. Otherwise
@code{-1} is returned.

For the sake of the example, here is a prototypal implementation of
the Usenix command @code{grep}:

@smalllisp
(define (main args)
   (cond
      ((null? (cdr args))
       (fprintf (current-error-port) "Usage: grep STRING [FILE]...")
       (exit 0))
      (else
       (let ((t (kmp-table (cadr args))))
	  (for-each (lambda (f) (grep-file t f)) (cddr args))))))

(define (grep-file t file)
   (let* ((mm (open-mmap file read: #t write: #f))
	  (ls (mmap-length mm)))
      (let loop ((o 0))
	 (unless (>=fx o ls)
	    (let ((n (kmp-mmap t mm o)))
	       (when (>fx n 0)
		  (print file ":" (mmap-line mm ls n))
		  (loop (+fx n 1))))))
      (close-mmap mm)))

(define (mmap-line mm ls n)
   (let ((b 0)
	 (e (elong->fixnum ls)))
      ;; beginning
      (let loop ((i n))
	 (when (>fx i 0)
	    (if (char=? (mmap-ref mm i) #\Newline)
		(set! b (+fx i 1))
		(loop (-fx i 1)))))
      ;; end
      (let loop ((i n))
	 (when (<fx i ls)
	    (if (char=? (mmap-ref mm i) #\Newline)
		(set! e i)
		(loop (+fx i 1)))))
      (mmap-substring mm b (- e b))))
@end smalllisp
@end deffn




